The interview with Chester Clark, and the
question is, did he feel that the media took
certain things about the Vietnam conflict out of
context in reporting? I mentioned Lieutenant
Calley, who, indeed, if you look at the things that
he was accused of doing and then some of the things
that he admitted doing, those are things that are
appalling to us. The murders of people, whether
innocent people or guilty people or whatever, The
murders of mass people recalled to people's minds
the things that happened in Germany with the Jews.
And the Israel was compared to that sometimes. And
I don't know what was in his mind, what he thought
about, what he had been through, even if the
actions he took were justified or not. I just know
that they were played up so that he was looked upon
as a madman and did all these murders because he had
the power to. and his supervisors were were
scrutinized for their part in it and not and he was
he was uh when he said i was following direct orders
since municipal and the whole military was looked
at as you give a guy an order and he follows it
without thinking about it so the military played
up a lot of things that have happened for a long time
and just applied them to vietnam All right, how did
you feel about the anti-war demonstrators and the
draft dodgers, the people who burned their draft
cards or went to Canada, that sort of thing, the
anti-war sentiment as a whole? As a professional
military man, of course, I didn't like any of it.
And I felt there would be better ways to show your
objection to a war. And I would never understand
someone going to Canada to avoid military
service. there's the demonstrations that they
had were very, I was, I was a part of those
demonstrations, if you will. When I came back from
Vietnam, my assignment was at the Pentagon and I
drove to work along the Potomac on the west side of
the Potomac. There were army tanks on the east side
of the Potomac that were around the reflection
pool and in front of the Lincoln Memorial where
they were having a lot of demonstrations. So I saw
the demonstrations firsthand and was affected by
the demonstrations. In fact, one of the things
that we had briefings on were the demonstrations
that were going on in the States and why they were
happening and
how a certain amount of people felt. But then on the
other hand, you'd receive letters and cards from
home that were supporting what you were doing,
supporting you. and from schools a lot of schools
have their the whole grade write a letter to dear gi
or dear mr joe and those things were very
refreshing to get because people were telling
their kids that the military was doing a job uh did
you know any veterans who came back after vietnam
and demonstrated against the war or any officers
who became members of Veterans for Peace or
Vietnam Veterans Against the War, any of those
groups? None at all. I was, and probably the
geography of where I was played a part in it. I was
stationed at the Pentagon and then stationed at
military bases. And no one that I was aware of was a
member of any group that opposed Vietnam or had any
or join any group that demonstrate actively
against what we've done.
So you didn't feel like there was an undercurrent
within the military against Vietnam at all? I
didn't. I really didn't. The people I was with, we
had a job to do. We realized the importance of the
job and just carried out those tasks that we had to
do. And my task was to support the ground troops
that were in Vietnam. Their task was to keep out
this spread of communism. And the way they were
doing it was with their way of fighting the war. And
sometimes that was by just simply keeping
infiltrators from coming down from the north, by
destroying supply lines that were supplying the
North Vietnamese and the South. or by trying to
even to help the South Vietnamese to gain their
self-respect and be self-reliant. So that was
also part of the plan to make Vietnam, South
Vietnam, be self-reliant when we did pull out. The
plan you are referring to is Vietnamization, I
believe. Do you feel, and it has been highly talked
about after the Vietnam War, Do you feel like if
that plan had been implemented the right way that
it would have worked? Implement the right way,
it's very difficult to say because had it been
implemented the right way, there would have been a
status quo in Vietnam. We would not have had the
North Vietnamese pulling one way and us pulling
another. For them to be self-reliant would have
meant they wouldn't have anybody trying to
overtake them because they were not strong enough
to stand on their own ever. We touched on this a
little while ago. How did or do you feel about Jane
Fonda and her denouncement of the United States?
That was really hard to take because Jane Fonda and
her family, of course, being movie folks, I've
enjoyed them in movies quite a bit, and Jane Fonda
made some statements that even if they'd been
true, it would have hurt very much to hear somebody
say them. And no one likes to hear that they've that
they bombed a hospital or a children's home or
something like that. And the reason that we were
privileged to the information about the
individuals I spoke of that did bomb the SAM site in
Hanoi was that the minute Jane Fonda said that,
there was doubts in almost everyone's minds that
we had done the right thing. And doubt creeps in
that you have, if you've really killed children,
and most of us had children, That really plays on
your mind. So they immediately made available to
us the pictures of the SAM site, the geography
around it, and we were assured that there was no...
There were, of course, civilian casualties. Any
time you bombed something, there's going to be
civilian casualties or casualties of people
around. But there was nothing like hospitals or
children's homes. And it was just not something
that she should have said And, of course, it didn't
matter if it was Jane Fonda. It could have been
anybody saying it, and that had the same effect.
But Jane Fonda was one that you expect her to be
backing you. You expect all the young Jane Fondas
and the movie stars to have the appeal to people to
back you, that people are looking up to. And it was
disappointing that someone of her stature would
say something that was that derogatory. I have
known some Vietnam veterans and some military
families that will not go to any Jane Fonda movies
or will not rent any of her videotapes for aerobics
or any of those things. Do you have that strong a
feeling against Jane Fonda or was it just simply at
that time what she said? It was just what she said
and not her. I didn't like her actions, but as for
her herself, I would probably like her. I have
nothing She has apologized since then, recently,
for some of the things that she said and did. And it
would be very interesting to know if her versions,
like the hospital and the children's home, if that
was actually something that she said, that she was
prompted to say, or if she really felt that she had
been shown what had been hit and bombed. I have no
idea. She has apologized for... What reason? I
don't know. If she apologized because she's
sincerely sorry for it, fine. If she's trying to
sell her newest exercise tape or her newest movie,
that'd be another story.
Did you or do you know any POWs who came out of the
conflict? Yes, I had one POW that was a POW for seven
years. His name was Ron Burns, and Ron I met his
family before I met him. I was stationed at the
Pentagon when I came back. And at the Pentagon, I
had occasion to meet several people who were
working with the POWs and trying to secure the
release of the POWs and to recover the bodies of the
killed in action and the missing in action to find
out what they were doing. And when I left the
Pentagon, I went to Hanscom Air Force Base near
Boston. And while there, I met a family, two boys
and the mother, whose husband was a POW, and knew
them very well. And while we were there, he was
released and came back. And he never really talked
about his experiences. He would always
tell you things that would be helpful to the
occasion. If in church he was asked to make a talk,
he would tell you about how his faith helped him to
get through, how his prayers were helped and how he
felt that people praying for him helped. If he was
talking to a scout group, he would tell them how his
preparedness for being in Vietnam had helped him
and how he would prepare for every day and how he
would think about those lessons he had learned and
disciplined and how all of his scout training
helped him. He would apply his experiences to
whatever he was talking about. He never showed a
lot of any bitterness or any self-pity or any of
those kinds of things that have come out from other
individuals that were POWs. He had a very tragic
homecoming as much as after he was released after
seven years, after about four months in the
States, his wife was found to have terminal cancer
and did die later on. And he took his seven years of
POW, his wife's death, he turned all those things
into something positive. He made a good life for
himself without retreating or feeling sorry for
himself or expecting anybody to do anything for
him over and above what they were doing for anybody
else. So you do feel that a lot of coming home after
Vietnam a lot of the problems that some of the
veterans have had, if they had dealt with them head
on, that they might have, as this may do, that they
might have been able to come through without the
traumatic experiences? Yes, I really do. And when
I say that, you have to understand where I'm coming
from. Colonel Burns, of course, was an officer. I
was an officer. We had different standards we
lived by because of the structure of the military
itself. and we probably were not exposed to as many
different uh situations as enlisted people were
are people in different areas of vietnam but i
think carl burns probably went through as many
traumatic experiences with seven years as pow and
with his losing his wife and the way he lost her as
anyone and he still did not suffer any of the the
horrible consequences that some of the people
have had have reported to have recently um i've
heard Earlier you mentioned special forces and
some of the different groups of the service. How
did you feel about the Green Berets and special
forces and those type people? Did you have respect
for those people or did you feel that they were not
in the same league as the Air Force?
I couldn't put a number on the amount of respect.
that I had for those people and the amount of
respect and gratitude that the American people
owe those people for what they did in Vietnam. I
worked with the Special Forces. I flew in and out of
their camps all the time. I was assigned to them
specifically. And in particular with the Army, I
worked with 101st Airborne. And the Green Berets
and Special Forces fought the war. The Air Force
didn't. We supplied them, we supported them, but
we didn't fight the war. Many times the Air Force
was called upon to do such things as drop bombs from
20,000 feet, which takes very little bravery on
anyone's part. We flew into places that were very
small landing strips, very difficult to get into,
but that required being a good pilot. It didn't
require any bravery at all or anything special. On
one occasion, we took a mortuary team into a site. A
123 had crashed into a mountain, and 13 people were
on board. There was communications gear on board.
You couldn't get to the site because it was on the
side of a mountain. So we secured helicopters to go
to the site. And we took a marchery team, a first
lieutenant, army first lieutenant, and his team
were lowered down from a helicopter onto the site
itself. The site was not secure at all. It was in VC
territory, and they owned the mountain it was on.
When we let the crew down, we let down the
lieutenant with his six people, and they were
responsible for securing the site as best they
could, and in the wreckage itself, find those 13
bodies, put them in body bags, and prepare them for
bringing them out of there to take them back to
Thompson Nook, to the mortuary. One of the
political...
hang-ups that we had was not a hang-up. The
engineer on the crew was from Thailand. It was
absolutely necessary that we return that
individual's body to the Thai government. And the
wreckage itself is very difficult to find
anybody's, much less a specific one. But that
lieutenant with his crew went down, and this was
part of their everyday mission. When they got on
the ground, the fog came in. and we had we could not
get them out at one time we had to go back to the to our
base and wait for the fog to lift go back in and pick
them up the lieutenant and his bunch stayed
overnight and they've been prepared to go down and
come right back up but they stayed overnight they
got the bodies they secured the area they found
that they had to To sleep, they had to tie
themselves to a tree because it was that steep on
the mountainside. They destroyed some of the
classified communications gear that was in the
C-123 when it crashed. We went back the next
morning to pick them up. I consider what they had
done very heroic, very deserving of some kind of
recognition in the medal. But their attitude was
they'd just simply done their job, and they
expected nothing for it but just to go back to their
base and start again. And when we radioed down to
the lieutenant, we said, you know, you spent the
night, no food, no shelter, no clothing. He says,
anything that you really want. And he came back
over the radio and he says, yes, sir. He says, I sure
would like a chocolate bar. And that was his
concern that he was still kind of, you know,
there's nothing like get us out of here, blah,
blah, blah. But we did get them out. And the
airplane was... The airplane was totally
destroyed. They did destroy the gear that
couldn't be left on the ground. They did find the
tie with the symbolic Buddha that they wear. We did
avoid what could have turned out to be an
international incident by returning the correct
body to Thailand. And these guys were just doing
their job. They expected nothing from it. as
opposed to other people who expected medals or
write-ups for everything they did. Do you feel
that Vietnam, that there were medals handed out
that were undeserved in Vietnam more so than any
other wars? Well, there were some handed out that
were not deserved, and the reason they were is
because of the position individuals were in. When
I was in Saigon as a safety officer, one ticker
individual, was in a position to write up the
things for a medal. And he himself came out very
decorated, even though he didn't, he never got out
of Saigon. And he wasn't a regular flyer. He flew
when he had to, to go somewhere and investigate an
accident. But he had a lot of medals. Some of the
medals were a little, I'll have some stories
behind them that that are interesting. We had, in a
C-123, there are cables that run back to the back
that control the elevator and the rudder. And
these cables sometimes fray and have little
spikes that stick out on them. When we would take
hits, we were usually getting hit in the back of the
airplane, and the things the guns they were
shooting with were not strong enough to go through
the plane. They would go through the bottom skin of
the plane, hit the top of the plane, and stay inside
the plane. You'd hear them rattling around. And
one particular time, we had taken several hits in
the back of the plane, and we knew that the slugs
were in the plane. And so my, one of the, no. It
wasn't my crew, but it was a crew. And the
loadmaster went back to the back to find the slug.
And he took out the bulkhead part that allows you to
go to the tail of the airplane and reached down to
the bottom of the plane to pick up these slugs that
were back there. When he did, he rubbed his hand
across the cable and cut himself. And a cut in
Vietnam is not like a cut anywhere else. Nothing
gets well by itself. You must doctor it. If you
leave it alone, it would be infected just quickly.
So he went to the doctor. As they landed, this thing
did bother him. So he went into the hospital. And
they were cleaning it out and working on it. And
someone said, how did you get this? And he said,
well, I was taking a shell out of the back of the
plane. And they wrote this up on their hospital
notes. And later on, someone read it and says, oh,
well, here's the guy that was wounded by a shell in a
plane. He deserves a Purple Heart. And it turns out
that this was someone put him in for the Purple
Heart. And he had already left Vietnam. He was back
in the States. So the paperwork came back down to
me, a safety officer, to find this guy's unit to
confirm he deserved a Purple Heart and to present
him with this Purple Heart. And when the guy was
contacted, of course, the true story came out that
he had been scratched with the cable and not been
shot. But that was just one of those things that
someone had written up because more than not,
Individuals who deserved awards weren't looking
for them, like the mortuary team. They were not
looking for awards. And when I flew people around,
one particular flight in the C-123, there were no
seats. We set the people on pallets, eight or 10
across, and put a big strap over them. And your
briefing to them was, if we crash, just bend
forward and hope for the best, because there's no
safety constraint. And you would look to the back
before you'd take off, and I remember one
particular flight, I looked around to the back,
and there was a kid sitting there with his M-16 on
one shoulder, reading a comic book, and out of his
pocket was sticking a purple heart that he had
received, and just sticking out of his pocket.
Well, most people would have them waving them and
say, look what I've got. He took it just for granted
that he had this thing there. And there he was,
reading a comic book, being flown right back into a
combat zone. What are the Vietnam movies that
you've seen, and which one do you consider to be
closest to the real Vietnam experience, or what
you were involved in? Well, unfortunately I
haven't seen that many movies, but of course I've
seen The Green Berets, and it did have some very
authentic parts to it, but it had a lot of Hollywood
commercialism in it also that were not true. I did
see The Good Morning Vietnam. And aside from being
very funny, that did have a few scenes in it where it
was very true that an individual like the one that
was the North Vietnamese that got him out of the
cafe before it was bombed, those things did
happen. people were aware that things were going
to happen before they happened. And when I first
arrived at Saigon, we were one day at the base.
Someone said, I wouldn't hang around the base too
long today. I'd go on home right after, you know,
right after when you finish going home. I said,
why? He says, well, look. And you could see that no
Vietnamese were hanging around the base. They
were all leaving early. And at that time, There was
a search of the Vietnamese as they walked out the
gate. And the two main things they were searching
for were silverware and the soap, the washing
powders. They would steal that frequently. But
they would have a little tub there that would take
the silverware off of them, spoons and knives and
forks. But when they all left, quickly, they knew
something was going to happen. And sure enough,
that night, the base was mortared because they
were all just filing out leaving. So they were
aware of what was happening. I know you mentioned
earlier that you have seen the USO and that you did
move some of the equipment. It was highly
classified. Do you believe that the USO helped to
bring the morale of the troops up? Or do you believe
it was beneficial to the troops? Oh, I really
believe it helped. Very beneficial. And the most
memorable occasion I had was at the USO show with
Bob Hope and Barbara McNair sang Silent Night. And
there were approximately 4,500 people in the
audience that night. That was the quietest that
you could ever hear a hillside. And that brought
home to people more than anything else. This was a
show that had the Miss America, Raquel Welch, and
all the trimmings. But the thing I remember the
most is Barbara McNair. You just echo through
that. And that just brought Christmas home just
like it was right there. Then the other show that
was there that was just super was Martha Rae. She
performed Hello Dolly, which brought you back to
the States quite a bit. But then she came out,
decked out in Green Beret outfit, the whole thing,
and just talked. And you could identify.
Everybody identified with what she was saying.
Everybody identified with her. And she made a very
strong point of telling you, how much she
supported you, what she was for, that she
represented the majority of the people in the
United States, that you were not over here in vain,
that you hadn't been forgotten. And you went away
with such a good feeling that her show was just
fantastic. Did it help to relieve some of the media
problems that had been... reported about vietnam
did that help to to make you realize that the
majority was behind you at that point yes and it was
very it was much easier to believe her than you know
it was just really to believe what she was saying it
helped to reiterate why you were there yeah yeah
she when she said you're doing a good job we believe
in you you know that that meant everything in the
world to us have you kept in contact with your unit
or with your crew members since you've left
vietnam I haven't. And after I came back from
Vietnam, I was at the Pentagon. And I did go to a
Friday classified briefing every Friday to
maintain contact with the unit and see what they
were doing. But as time went along, I got very busy
with what I was doing, very involved with my
current job, and got completely away from what was
happening in Vietnam and simply followed it
through the news media like every other person in
the United States. Did you have trouble
readjusting when you came back to the weather or to
your family, to not being in a war situation?
I would like to say no, I had no trouble at all. I
probably did and don't realize what it was. One of
the, when I got off the plane, well actually, The
first time I got back, weather was a problem. I was
in a very thin raincoat, and we landed in Seattle,
Washington. And Lord, I don't know how cold it was,
but that raincoat wasn't enough. But when I got off
the plane to Dallas and came out, I was one of the
last ones out of the plane. And when I walked out,
there was this little three-year-old kid that
kept saying, Daddy, Daddy, Daddy, everybody in
uniform. And it was Tom, and he didn't know. He just
knew Daddy was in uniform and was coming out. And
probably I had trouble adjusting to them as they
did to me. But it's like anything else. I remember
only the good and not the bad. Very true. Very true.
What are you doing now? And do you feel that your
experience in Vietnam has helped you in the rest of
your life and in coping with things? My current job
now is I teach high school. I actually work in high
school. And my military career overall has helped
me in being a teacher, as much as in Vietnam as well
as in my job in the Air Force. I was always an
instructor pilot or an instructor for ground
school, far flying. And in that capacity, I
learned the teaching techniques. I worked with
people. And I've just taken those skills and, of
course, using my math background, I now teach math
in high school. And the only thing I find that is
lacking is I can't order the kids around like I
could the people under me in the Air Force. Not
quite as captive. No. But I have used all of my
experience in coping with different situations,
especially different situations in Vietnam, to
cope with situations in the States which do not
ever approach the severity of the situation I was
in. My final question is, Do you feel that serving
in Vietnam changed you, and if so, how?
I really don't think it changed me in any way that I
wouldn't have changed ordinarily, except it did
it faster. In other words, if you're going to grow
up, some people grow up at a certain rate of speed. I
was going at that certain rate of speed. I was doing
things that you do. I came out of high school and
went to college. I came out of college and went in
the military. I stayed in the military and things
were just happening for me as they should happen. I
got married, I had children. I went to Vietnam and
probably matured four for one. I probably came
back more mature, more aware of people's
problems, more aware that there were more
problems in the world than taking the trash out to
the curb on a Friday morning. That helped me to grow
up faster. be more tolerant of other people's
problems and to learn to live with situations that
are out of the ordinary. Learn to go from a very
comfortable home in the States to a situation in
Vietnam where suddenly there was, the first time I
saw my uniforms washed on a rock, with a rock
hitting him on the floor. That, I thought, you
think about how far away that is from a, from a
washing machine back home. And at the time, It was
very easy to compare, and when I got back from
Vietnam, it was very easy to look at the things that
we had that we take for granted every day and
realize how lucky we are and how much we have. And to
also realize that this idealism that we had, that
we could keep communism out of Vietnam, was really
worthwhile, that we really were fighting for
something worthwhile. And the way that Saigon is
now Ho Chi Minh City, that the South Vietnamese are
now under communist rule, tells me that we were
doing the right thing. We were doing it for the
right cause. I just wish that we could have
accomplished what we set out to do. Thank you very
much. I appreciate your time.